= Fast group_by

An unordered group_by implementation that is a gazillion times faster than
ActiveSupport's ordered version. This becomes apparent when used with large data sets.

== ActiveSupport 2.2.x vs 2.3.x

The above holds true for ActiveSupport 2.2.x, but a benchmark for ActiveSupport 2.3.2 shows that fast_group_by got 75% slower when compared to 2.2.x. Performance of group_by was increased significantly and is on-par with fast_group_by.

=== The speedup

Using git bisect on the rails source (see examples/bench.sh), discovered the commit that caused the ActiveSupport speedup:

  commit 355f41d8aafd75d76db25cdda4736e0052b0605c
  Author: Frederick Cheung <frederick.cheung@gmail.com>
  Date:   Tue Dec 9 20:36:24 2008 +0000

      Rework ActiveSupport::OrderedHash to make lookups faster
    
      [#1352 state:committed]
    
      Signed-off-by: Jeremy Kemper <jeremy@bitsweat.net>
    
This new version is how I would implement an OrderedHash as well: OrderedHash inherits from Hash and keeps track of the key insertion order in an internal Array.

This still does not explain where the slowdown comes from, though. That's for a next benchmark.

== How to install

Once the gem appears on gems.github.com, you can install it with:
  sudo gem install Narnach-fast_group_by

The alternative is to clone the git repo and build the gem yourself:
  git clone git://github.com/Narnach/fast_group_by.git
  cd fast_group_by
  rake install

== Rationale

ActiveSupport uses OrderedHash in its Enumerable#group_by, which uses nested Arrays to store data. Array#assoc is used to find if keys are already defined.
For small Arrays, Array#assoc's linear search is about as fast as Hash#[]' tree search, but for larger data sets, the difference in lookup speed becomes noticeable.

The reason why I wrote this is that the OrderedHash version took 66 seconds to group a collection of 50k items. The Hash version took less than 1 second.

== License

Copyright (c) 2009 Wes Oldenbeuving

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE
LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION
OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.